To demonstrate how
Goal Seek can be used,
let's look at a real-world
example together.
An airline company you're working
for is considering expanding
their portfolio by adding
Atlanta as a new destination.
This would require an
initial investment of
$250,000 to secure capacity
at the Atlanta airport.
Your market research team
estimates that the
additional raul would
generate $100,000 and
incremental profit in Year 1,
and an additional 50,000 in
profit during Years 2 through 5.
In order to determine whether or
not this is a
worthwhile investment,
let's look into net
present value or
NPV and internal rate
of return or IRR.
NPV accounts for
the time value of
money and calculates how
much the returns are
worth in today's
terms if you were
to receive that in a
future time period.
In simple terms, NPV is
how much a dollar given to you in
five years is worth today.
NPV also includes any costs
associated with the investment.
IRR on the other hand,
looks at the same problem
from a different angle.
IRR seeks to find
the interest rate that sets
the NPV equation to zero.
In summary, NPV can be viewed as
the profitability of a
project in absolute terms,
where IRR is the profitability of
a project in relative
terms or percentage.
Now that we understand
what we're trying to find,
let's get back to
the problem at hand.
Based on the financial
outlays table,
we can calculate NPV and
the IRR in two ways.
First we'll use the NPV
formula before showing how
the Goal Seek can
help us arrive at
the same answer but much
faster and more precisely.
First, we'll set up a
formula for NPV in Excel,
which is dependent on the
value of our discount rate.
Let's type in the formula.
As a reminder from Course 2,
the syntax for NPV is
the discount rate followed
by the cash flow
starting at Year 1,
which equals NPV,
open parenthesis,
our discount rate H28 comma.
Then our outlays range so B27
through rows B31 plus B26.
We subtracted the Year 0 outlay
or the initial investment after
the NPV formula to
take the investment
into account without
discounting it as it is
assumed the cash
outlay is made today.
As you can see here,
if the discount
rate is 10 percent,
the NPV is $472,168.75.
To calculate what discount rate
will force NPV to equal zero,
we also have a few options.
The brute force way is to
use trial and error with
the input value and see when
you're getting close
to the desired answer.
We can try it with a few values;
25 percent, 35 percent,
and 55 percent.
Notice as the discount
rate becomes larger,
NPV is getting closer
and closer to zero.
So we can be sure that the IRR
is close to 56 percent
based on what we've seen.
However, if you want to save
the time and skip
straight to the results,
Goal Seek is a perfect tool.
In order to quickly
determine what
the internal rate of return
is or in other words,
what discount rate will
make the NPV equation zero,
let's navigate to the data tab.
Find What If Analysis
and select Goal Seek
from the drop down.
In the pop-up window,
you will see that there are
three input parameters;
set cell, to value,
and by changing cell.
Set cell is where we specify
which cell is the outcome
we're trying to monitor.
In our case, it is the NPV.
In the two value field,
type in the value of the
desired outcome which in
our case we want the NPV
to be equal to zero.
Finally, the by changing
cell field is where we can
specify which variable
we would like
to manipulate to get
the result we want,
which in this case
translates to the IRR.
After all three parameters
are filled out,
let's click on Okay.
Excel will then
automatically cycle
through the different values of
an IRR to make the
NPV equal to zero.
The final answer Goal Seek
came up with is 56.72 percent.
In other words, if the discount
rate is 56.72 percent,
the net present value or NPV
of the investment will
be equal to zero.
Now, let's double
check our answers.
Luckily for us, Excel already
has a built-in formula
specifically for
calculating IRR as long as
you have the financial
outlay of the investment.
So H30 let's type
in the IRR formula.
Equals IRR open parenthesis
then B26 through cells B31.
This refers to the same
financial outlay table
that we used earlier to build
out our Goal Seek tool.
As you can see, the
formula returns 56.72
percent which is
exactly the same result
that the Goal Seek
tool has arrived at.
Now you can see Goal Seek
allows you to experiment
with an input variable
to get a desired answer.
We use this all the time to
help define our scenarios.
For example, Goal Seek is
a perfect tool to determine
what the price of electricity
needs to be to make
a natural gas power plant
profitable at
different gas prices.
To summarize, Goal Seek is
located under the data tab
under What If Analysis and then
you'll see Goal Seek
in the drop down.
In order to use Goal Seek,
there needs to be
a formula linking
the cell you are changing
to the end results.
As long as you have established
an Excel formula or
a mathematical equation to define
how the variable and
the result are related,
Goal Seek can help you take
the guesswork out of your
calculation by quickly
finding what variable value you
need to achieve the end
results results you want.
Now, it's your turn to practice.